OBSDOCS-1144: Document the OTEL Collector dashboards (#79110)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/otel-troubleshoot-metrics.adoc

.Procedure

. Enable the telemetry service by adding the following lines in the `OpenTelemetryCollector` custom resource (CR):

+
[source,yaml]
----
# ...
  config: |
    service:
      telemetry:
        metrics:
          address: ":8888" # <1>
# ...
----
<1> The address at which the internal collector metrics are exposed. Defaults to `:8888`.

. Retrieve the metrics by running the following command, which uses the port-forwarding Collector pod:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc port-forward <collector_pod>
----

. In the `OpenTelemetryCollector` CR, set the `enableMetrics` field to `true` to scrape internal metrics by using `PodMonitors` or `ServiceMonitors` depending on the deployment mode of the OpenTelemetry Collector:
:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
spec:
# ...
  mode: deployment
  observability:
    metrics:
      enableMetrics: true # <1>
# ...
----
+
[NOTE]
====
Alternatively, if you don't set the `enableMetrics` field to `true`, you can access the metrics endpoint at `+http://localhost:8888/metrics+`.
====

> . In the *Observe* section of the OpenShift Console, enable *User Workload Monitoring* to visualize the scraped metrics. You can filter by metrics from an OpenTelemetry Collector instance or OpenTelemetry components such as processors, receivers, or exporters.

Reviewer: We need to add a note here that Data points for Processor Metrics accepted, dropped, refused / second and Processor Spans accepted, dropped, refused / second depends on the type of processor used in the OpenTelemetry collector config. Not all processors expose the required metrics. Refer bug https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-4484

Author: Done. Tank you.

.Procedure

. Enable the telemetry service by adding the following lines in the `OpenTelemetryCollector` custom resource (CR):

+
[source,yaml]
----
# ...
  config: |
    service:
      telemetry:
        metrics:
          address: ":8888" # <1>
# ...
----
<1> The address at which the internal collector metrics are exposed. Defaults to `:8888`.

. Retrieve the metrics by running the following command, which uses the port-forwarding Collector pod:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc port-forward <collector_pod>
----

> . In the `OpenTelemetryCollector` CR, set the `enableMetrics` field to `true` to scrape internal metrics by using `PodMonitors` or `ServiceMonitors` depending on the deployment mode of the OpenTelemetry Collector:

Reviewer 2: This is a long sentence and as it currently stands I think it might need something to make the pacing sound more natural. I feel like a comma here would probably help, otherwise feel free to rework it in any way you think would be better:
```suggestion
. In the `OpenTelemetryCollector` CR, set the `enableMetrics` field to `true` to scrape internal metrics by using `PodMonitors` or `ServiceMonitors`, depending on the deployment mode of the OpenTelemetry Collector:
```

Another option would be to split it up into two sentences (assuming it still makes sense and is accurate):
```suggestion
. In the `OpenTelemetryCollector` CR, set the `enableMetrics` field to `true` to scrape internal metrics. Depending on the deployment mode of the OpenTelemetry Collector, use either `PodMonitors` or `ServiceMonitors`.
```

Author: Thank you for the suggestion. I split the sentence into two and moved the second part to appear after/below the code block.

> :

Reviewer 2: This colon needs to be deleted, since it's rendering in the preview as a double colon at the end of the sentence above
```suggestion
```

Author: Thank you for spotting this.

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
spec:
# ...
  mode: deployment
  observability:
    metrics:

>       enableMetrics: true # <1>

Reviewer 2: This callout is missing a label below, either you need to add one or remove this callout

Author: Thank you for spotting this. This is already corrected.

# ...
----
+
[NOTE]
====

> Alternatively, if you don't set the `enableMetrics` field to `true`, you can access the metrics endpoint at `+http://localhost:8888/metrics+`.

Reviewer 2: Per the [SSG](https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#contractions), we should avoid contractions when possible for clarity and ease of translation:
```suggestion
Alternatively, if you do not set the `enableMetrics` field to `true`, you can access the metrics endpoint at `+http://localhost:8888/metrics+`.
```

Author: Thank you so much. Fixed.

====

> . In the *Observe* page in the web console, enable *User Workload Monitoring* to visualize the scraped metrics.

Reviewer 2: Just checking - is there any prerequisite that needs to be added to this procedure since it's now instructing users to perform actions on the web console?

Author: The web console is used for viewing the metrics. It's just making use of an existing functionality. The whole instance is installable by using the web console, and a number of this product's features use the web console, so it is common for tasks to be performed by using the web console for this product.

> . In the *Observe* page in the web console, enable *User Workload Monitoring* to visualize the scraped metrics.

Reviewer 2: Very much a nit but I believe using "on" might be more appropriate here, and I think this [SSG example](https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#user-interface-elements) uses the same phrasing:
```suggestion
. On the *Observe* page in the web console, enable *User Workload Monitoring* to visualize the scraped metrics.
```

Author: Thank you. Fixed.

+
[NOTE]
====
Not all processors expose the required metrics.
====

> . In the *Observe* -> *Dashboards* page in the web console, select the *OpenTelemetry Collector* dashboard from the drop-down list to view it.

Reviewer 2: This suggestion has two parts:

1. Remove mention of the web console since the previous step provides the context that the web console is now being used
2. rephrase the first part to focus on instructing users to navigate to the dashboards page
```suggestion
. Go to *Observe* -> *Dashboards* and select the *OpenTelemetry Collector* dashboard from the drop-down list to view it.
```

Author: Thank you for this suggestion. I'd like to keep the mention of the web console so that readers know that this step is about it.

+
[TIP]
====

> You can filter the visualized data such as spans or metrics by the Collector instance, namespace, or OpenTelemetry components such as processors, receivers, or exporters.

Reviewer 2: I think this sentence uses two sets of commas for what is technically two lists:

1. the Collector instance, namespace, or OpenTelemetry components
2. processors, receivers, or exporters (which are examples of the components in the first list)

In this case, I think it might be appropriate to use semicolons here as well to separate the different lists, as per the [ISG](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=punctuation-semicolons#semicolons-between-items-in-a-series):
```suggestion
You can filter the visualized data such as spans or metrics by the Collector instance; namespace; or OpenTelemetry components such as processors, receivers, or exporters.
```

If I'm misinterpreting the grammar rule feel free to disregard this

----

. Access the metrics endpoint at `+http://localhost:8888/metrics+`.

> Alternatively, you can enable the creation of PodMonitors or ServiceMonitors (depending on the deployment mode of the OpenTelemetryCollector) to scrap the internal metrics by setting to `true` the `enableMetrics` setting.

Author: @iblancasa, which option (line 42 or line 44+) do you recommend to users? Do you have a clear preference?

Reviewer 3: One or another will be enabled automatically depending on how the OTEL Collector was deployed (if it is `Sidecar` mode, for instance, a `PodMonitor` will be created but for `Deployment` mode a `ServiceMonitor` will be created.)

Author: :sweat_smile: Sorry for my lack of clarity: I mean whether to access the metrics endpoint or scrap the internal metrics by setting to `true` the `enableMetrics` setting.

Reviewer 3: Oh! Sorry.

I would suggest enabling the `enableMetrics` field because, with that, users will not need to change anything on their side.

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
spec:
  mode: deployment
  observability:
    metrics:
      enableMetrics: true # <1>
----

> If `User Workload Monitoring` is enabled, you will be able to visualize the scraped metrics in the `Observe` section from the OpenShift Console. Note you can select to visualize the specific metrics from an OpenTelemetry Collector instance or OpenTelemetry component (processor, receiver or exporter).

Author: @iblancasa, what is `User Workload Monitoring`? Is this a field in a CR or a UI button somewhere?
